arXiv:2105.02837v1 [cs.CG] 6 May 2021  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

                                       Kevin Buchin

                                       Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, Netherlands

                                       Mart Hagedoorn

                                       Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, Netherlands

                                       Irina Kostitsyna

                                       Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, Netherlands

                                       Max van Mulken

                                       Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, Netherlands

                                              Abstract

                                       Exactly 20 years ago at MFCS, Demaine posed the open problem whether the game of Dots & Boxes
                                       is PSPACE-complete. Dots & Boxes has been studied extensively, with for instance a chapter in
                                       Berlekamp et al. Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays, a whole book on the game The Dots
                                       and Boxes Game: Sophisticated Child's Play by Berlekamp, and numerous articles in the Games
                                       of No Chance series. While known to be NP-hard, the question of its complexity remained open.
                                       We resolve this question, proving that the game is PSPACE-complete by a reduction from a game
                                       played on propositional formulas.

                                       2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation  Computational geometry

                                       Keywords and phrases Dots & Boxes, PSPACE-complete, combinatorial game

                                        1 Introduction

                                       Dots & Boxes is a popular paper-and-pencil game that is played by two players on a grid of
                                       dots. The players take turns connecting two adjacent dots. If a player completes the fourth
                                       side of a unit box, the player is awarded a point and an additional turn. When no more
                                       moves can be made, the player with the highest score wins the game.1

                                           Originally described in 1883 [29], Dots & Boxes has since received a considerable amount
                                       of attention in the research community. In Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays,
                                       Berlekamp, Conway, and Guy [6] were among the first to discuss a number of interesting
                                       mathematical properties of the game. Later, Berlekamp [5] wrote an entire book The Dots-
                                       and-Boxes game: Sophisticated Child's Play about the game, in particular discussing winning
                                       strategies in particular positions. Since then, the mathematics of Dots & Boxes and variants
                                       has been discussed in many papers and books [1, 2, 7, 12, 16, 21, 22, 26, 30, 31, 33, 34].
                                       There is also a rich body of work on solvers for Dots & Boxes [3, 4, 11, 27, 35].

                                           Berlekamp et al. [6] argue that deciding the winner of a generalized version of Dots &
                                       Boxes, called Strings-and-Coins, is NP-hard. In this game, players take turns in removing
                                       edges of a given graph, scoring a point when they isolate a vertex. When restricted to
                                       the dual graph of a square grid, this corresponds to a dual formulation of Dots & Boxes.
                                       Eppstein [17] notes that the reduction given by Berlekamp et al. should extend to Dots &
                                       Boxes, and a formal proof of the NP-hardness is given in [8].

                                           Exactly 20 years ago at MFCS, Demaine posed the open problem whether Dots &
                                       Boxes is PSPACE-complete [13]. Bounded two-player games, like Dots & Boxes, (that is,
                                       games in which the number of moves is bounded) naturally lie in PSPACE, since a Turing
                                       machine using space polynomial in the board size is able to search the entirety of the game

                                       1 For a visual explanation of the game see https://youtu.be/KboGyIilP6k, last accessed 6.5.2021
2  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

   space. Often, these games are also PSPACE-hard [13]. PSPACE-hardness of many bounded
   two-player games is shown by a reduction from Generalized Geography, which is proven
   PSPACE-complete by Lichtenstein and Sipser [28]. For example, the PSPACE-completeness
   of Reversi [24], uncooperative UNO [14], and Tic-Tac-Toe [23] were shown by a reduction
   from Generalized Geography. However, unlike Dots & Boxes, the setting of Generalized
   Geography prescribes a stricter order on players' moves, making a reduction to Dots & Boxes
   challenging to obtain.

       In their seminal work, Hearn and Demaine [20, 21] introduce Constraint Logic, a framework
   for analyzing complexity of games and puzzles. Inspired by Flake and Baum's proof of
   Rush Hour [18], it specifies a type of game played on a constraint graph. The framework
   includes bounded/unbounded state spaces and single/two-player variations. In the same
   work, Hearn and Demaine go on to provide a number of simpler reductions for various
   known PSPACE-complete games (including Rush Hour), as well as new proofs for several
   PSPACE-complete games. However, the Constraint Logic framework is intended for proving
   hardness of partisan games (games in which the moves available to the two players are
   different), whereas Dots & Boxes is not a partisan game.

       Strings-and-Coins and the related game of Nimstring were very recently (while we were
   preparing this submission) proven to be PSPACE-complete by Demaine and Diomidov [15]
   by a reduction from a game on a DNF formula Gpos(POS DNF) [32]. But, as they point
   out, their results do not apply to Dots & Boxes, since the game positions they construct rely
   on multi-graphs (which additionally are neither planar nor have a maximum degree of 4).
   Specifically, they propagate signals through multi-edges consisting of a polynomial number
   of parallel edges, and the winner is the player who removes the last edge. As consequence,
   our reduction bears little commonalities with theirs.

       In this paper, we prove that Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete by a reduction from
   Gpos(POS CNF). The starting point of our construction are strategies for Dots & Boxes
   endgames that were also used to prove NP-hardness. However, the NP-hardness is proven
   by having one player be in control, and there being only one way for the other player to
   respond. This de facto makes the game to be 1-player game. For PSPACE-hardness we
   need both players to have choices, making it a true 2-player game. This gives a lot of
   freedom to the players, and makes it much more difficult to construct gadgets to control
   the gameplay, in particular because moves and scoring opportunities for one player--if not
   played immediately--are also available to the other player.

       In Section 1.1 we discuss the gameplay of Dots & Boxes in detail, and introduce terminology
   coined by Berlekamp et al. [6]. In Section 2 we present the general structure of our reduction,
   and then describe our gadgets in Section 3. In Section 4 we first show that the players'
   strategies, which we intend the players to use, are optimal for them and finally prove
   PSPACE-hardness.

   1.1 Dots & Boxes

   On the surface, Dots & Boxes is quite a simple game. The starting and a typical final position
   for a 10 × 10 grid are shown in Figure 1. We refer to the players playing the blue and the
   red colors as Trudy and Fred, respectively. The color of a line connecting two dots indicates
   which player drew it, and the color of a box--which player closed it.

       Consider a dual graph G of a board of Dots & Boxes, where a node in G corresponds
   to a box or the unbounded face, and a pair of nodes in G is connected with an edge if the
   corresponding move is still available, i.e., the line between the boxes has not been drawn.
   Let the degree of a box be the degree of the corresponding node in G.
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                                 3

(a) Starting position of a Dots &  (b) An example of a loony en-  (c) A possible end position.
Boxes game with a 10 × 10 grid.    dgame state of the game.       Trudy (blue) won with 62 boxes
                                                                  versus Fred's (red) 19 boxes.

Figure 1 Typical starting, intermediate, and final position of a Dots & Boxes game.

    In Dots & Boxes, a typical game usually results in a board state that consists exclusively
of moves that open the possibility for the opponent to claim a number of boxes in their next
turn (see Figure 1b). That is, in this state there are no degree-1 boxes, but any move made by
a player creates a degree-1 box that can be immediately claimed by the opponent. Consider
such a board configuration S and any available move  in it. At least one box b incident to
 has degree two in S (before the move  is made). Consider a maximal component  of
degree-2 boxes in S containing b. There are two cases, either  is a chain ending in boxes of
degree higher than two (or the outer face), or  is a cycle. Then we say that a player making
the move  opens the chain (cycle)  for the opponent.

    To devise a good strategy for Dots & Boxes, it is important to note that a player is not
obliged to claim a box whenever they have the ability to do so. While seemingly counter-
intuitive, it is sometimes beneficial for a player to sacrifice a small number of boxes for
long-term gain. Consider the position in Figure 2, and let it be Fred's (red) turn. Here, it
may seem intuitive for Fred to claim the bottom three boxes (Figure 2 (top)). However, after
doing so Fred has to make an extra move, allowing Trudy (blue) to claim the remaining four
boxes and win the game. On the other hand, by sacrificing two boxes (Figure 2 (bottom)),
Fred can force Trudy to make another move and open the middle chain for him to claim.
That way, Fred loses two boxes in the bottom chain, but gains all four boxes in the middle
chain, securing the win.

    In Winning Ways, Berlekamp et al. [6] refer to the moves sacrificing a small number of
boxes but passing the turn onto the opponent as double-dealing moves. Double-dealing moves
can be made in chains of boxes, sacrificing two boxes, and in cycles, sacrificing four boxes

                                   Fred       Trudy               Fred

                                           4  4
                                   32 1       32 1

                                                   2              4
                                              1                   32 1

                                   21

    Figure 2 Two possible plays that Fred (red) can do. Fred can choose to claim all the available
boxes (top) and lose the game, or to perform a double-dealing move sacrificing two boxes (bottom,
second state, edge 2), and win the game. The order of the edges that are played by Trudy or Fred in
one turn is indicated by edge labels. This example is borrowed from Winning Ways, chapter 16 [6].
4  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

        Figure 3 Double-dealing move by Fred (red). If Trudy (blue) opens a chain (or a cycle), Fred
   can claim a sequence of boxes. To pass the turn back to Trudy, Fred can leave two (or four) boxes
   unclaimed.

   (see Figure 3). Each double-dealing move is usually immediately followed by the opponent
   making at least one double-cross move, i.e., a move that closes two boxes at once. These
   double-dealing and double-cross moves are essential for players that want to consistently win
   games of Dots & Boxes, and will be used in the reduction later.

       Note that double-dealing moves are only possible in long chains of at least three boxes,
   and in cycles. (Chains of length one do not have enough boxes for a double-dealing move,
   and a chain of length two can be opened by selecting the middle edge, thus preventing the
   opponent from playing a double-dealing move.) Thus, opening a long chain or a cycle, if
   there are other moves available, is often a bad idea. Berlekamp et al. [6] refer to such moves
   as loony moves.

       Making loony moves is not always a choice. If, at some point in the game, all unclaimed
   boxes are part of long chains and cycles, the only possible moves are loony moves (Figure 1b).
   Such positions are referred to as a loony endgames. Note that in chains of length  4 and
   cycles of length  8, the player making the double-dealing moves scores at least as many
   boxes as their opponent. Thus, in loony endgames with chains of length  4 and cycles of
   length  8, under optimal play, the game consists of one player making loony moves (opening
   chains and cycles), and the other player claiming all but two or four boxes, and making
   double-dealing moves to pass the turn back to the opponent [6]. Here, the player making the
   double-dealing moves is always better off, since each chain or cycle yields at least as many
   boxes to this player as it yields to their opponent. This player is thus referred to as being in
   control of the game. The benefit of being in control can be seen in Figure 1c, which is the
   end result of Trudy being in control of the loony endgame shown in Figure 1b.

       In Winning Ways, Berlekamp et al. [6] state that finding a winning strategy in the loony
   endgame for the player who is not in control is NP-hard. They argue that maximizing
   the number of disjoint cycles will maximize the score of the player not in control, since
   double-dealing moves in cycles yield twice as many boxes as double-dealing moves in chains.
   Since this property is important for our reduction, we restate it here and, for completeness,
   present the argument in the appendix.

    Lemma 1. Let the configuration of a loony endgame contain k boxes with degree higher
   than 2, let T be the sum of the degrees of these boxes, and let c be the maximum number of
   disjoint cycles in the configuration. Then, the player who is not in control can claim at most
   4c + T - 2k - 4 boxes.

    2 Structure of the construction

   To show that Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-hard we reduce from the game Gpos(POS CNF),
   introduced and proven PSPACE-complete by Schaefer [32]. The game is played by two
   players, Trudy and Fred, on a positive CNF formula F. The players take turns picking a
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                               5

    Figure 4 A choice of a cycle can encode the value of a signal.

variable that has not yet been chosen. Variables picked by Trudy are set to true, variables
picked by Fred are set to false. When all variables have been chosen, the game ends. Trudy
wins if formula F evaluates to true, and Fred wins if formula F evaluates to false.

    Given a positive CNF formula F with n variables and m clauses, we construct an instance
of Dots & Boxes in which Trudy has a winning strategy if and only if she also has a winning
strategy in the corresponding instance of Gpos(POS CNF). For simplicity we assume that
n is even, so that Trudy and Fred get to assign values to the same number of variables. If
the number of variables in F is odd, we can introduce dummy variables without changing
the outcome of a game such that the total number of the variables becomes even. For each
variable and clause of F we construct a variable and a clause gadget, respectively. We place
the variable gadgets in a row at the top of the board of Dots & Boxes, and the clause gadgets
in a row at the bottom. We connect the variable gadgets to their corresponding clause gadgets
using the wire gadgets, which transfer the values of the variables to the clauses. If a clause
consists of more than one variable, the wires from these variables must pass through an
or gadget. Since the signals propagating from the variables may need to cross each other,
we construct a crossover gadget that preserves the values in the two crossing wires. In our
instance of Dots & Boxes, only the gadgets contain available moves. The remaining boxes on
the board have all the incident edges present.

    As we detail in Section 4, after the values of the variables are set, the game enters a loony
endgame where Fred is in control. Then Trudy's winning strategy reduces to selecting a
maximum set of disjoint cycles Cmax in the remaining configuration (Lemma 1). To maximize
her score, Trudy opens all the chains outside of Cmax first, gaining two boxes per chain, and
opens the chosen cycles last, gaining four boxes per cycle. The optimal play for Fred is to
ensure that he will be in control when the loony endgame starts. After entering the loony
endgame, simply making double-dealing moves until his very last turn is optimal for Fred.

Signal representation Most of our gadgets consist of partially overlapping cycles of boxes.
The choice of a set of disjoint cycles determines the value of a signal. For example, in Figure 4
the choice of the left vs. right cycle can encode the value true vs. false. Of course, Trudy
could join the cycles together to select the outermost cycle, but this, as we show later, will
not be more beneficial.

Variable assignment As both players must have a choice in picking which variable to set,
the instance of Dots & Boxes cannot yet be in a loony endgame. Thus, the variable gadgets,
which we describe in detail in Section 3.4, contain non-loony moves instrumental in setting
the value of a variable. We ensure that the optimal behavior of both players results in the
variables being set in alternating fashion, where Trudy sets them to true, and Fred sets
them to false. Once all variables are set, the loony endgame is entered. At this point Fred
is in control of the game, and it is up to Trudy to maximize her score by maximizing the
number of disjoint cycles in Cmax. The optimal play by Trudy results in a correct propagation
6  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

   of the signals from the variables to the clauses.

   Remaining constraints and scoring To ensure that optimal play by both players in the
   instance of Dots & Boxes corresponds to a valid Gpos(POS CNF) game, our gadgets need
   to give a specific number of boxes to Trudy depending on the signal values. We will show
   that after the variable values have been set, under optimal play, Trudy can maximize her
   score only if the signals are propagated correctly. Every gadget, except for the clause, yields
   the same number of disjoint cycles independent of the values of the signals passing through
   the gadget. Only the clause gadget gives more cycles to Trudy if a true signal reaches it.
   Exactly half of the variables are set to true, and half to false. Thus we can tune the
   starting score count between Trudy and Fred such that the game is won by Trudy if and
   only if all the clauses are satisfied.

    3 Gadgets

   In this section we provide the details of the gadgets used in our reduction. When describing
   the gadgets below, for a simpler exposition, we assume that the moves that Trudy and Fred
   make follow the following sequence. First, in the first n moves Trudy and Fred set all the
   variables to true and false respectively. Afterwards, when the loony endgame is entered,
   the order in which Trudy selects which cycles to add to the disjoint set of cycles Cmax is
   from the top to bottom, that is, from the variables, through the outgoing wires, through the
   crossover and or gadgets, and finally down to the clause gadgets. Later, in Lemma 7, we will
   show that, indeed, under optimal gameplay Trudy and Fred start by setting all the variables.
   Furthermore, we will argue that the outcome of the game depends only on the choice of the
   cycles in Cmax, and not on the order in which Trudy selects them.

   3.1 Basic wiring

   Signals from the variable gadgets are propagated to the clause gadgets through wires. A wire
   consists of a chain of an even number of partially overlapping cycles (see Figure 5). The
   first cycle in the wire overlaps with the gadget from which the signal is propagated, and
   the last cycle overlaps with the gadget towards which the signal is propagated. Consider
   some wire w, let Ci be its first cycle overlapping with gadget Gi, and let Co be its last cycle

       Figure 5 A wire gadget consisting of four overlapping cycles and two ways of selecting disjoint
   cycles. Shown in green are the connections to the adjacent gadgets. Selecting odd cycles in Cmax
   corresponds to true (top), and selecting even cycles corresponds to false (bottom).
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                            7

overlapping with gadget Go. If Ci is disjoint from the cycles of Gi that Trudy adds to Cmax,
then we say that the input signal to the wire is true; otherwise, if Ci overlaps with one of
the cycles of Gi in Cmax, the input value is false. If Trudy does not add Co to Cmax, then
the output signal is true, and the output signal is false otherwise.

    To ensure that Fred always follows the strategy of double-dealing moves, we require that
each maximal chain of degree-2 boxes in a wire gadgets contain at least four boxes. That
way, Fred receives at least as many boxes in each chain (and cycle) as Trudy, and thus for
Fred being in control is always beneficial [6].

    Note that, besides the lower bound on the length of a chain, the size and the embedding
of the overlapping cycles in a wire can be chosen freely. Thus wires are very flexible in
connecting components together, which facilitates the construction.

 Lemma 2. Let a wire w consist of 2k partially overlapping cycles. Then, under optimal
play, if the signal in w changes from false to true, then Trudy can select at most k - 1
disjoint cycles from w to add to Cmax. Otherwise, under optimal play, Trudy can select k
disjoint cycles from w to add to Cmax.

Proof. As we show in Lemma 7, after the first n moves, which Trudy and Fred make in the

variable gadgets, the game enters a loony endgame with Fred in control. If the output signal

in the wire matches the input signal, then only one of Ci or Co of w are in Cmax. Then Trudy
can select all odd (if Ci  Cmax) or all even (if Co  Cmax) cycles to add to Cmax, which
results in k disjoint cycles. If the the input signal is true, and the output signal is false,

then both Ci and Co are in Cmax. Then Trudy can, for example, select k - 1 odd cycles and

Co to add to Cmax, which again results in k cycles in total.

If, however, the input signal is false, and the output signal is true, then neither Ci

nor Co can be in Cmax. This leaves a chain of 2k - 2 cycles, of which at most k - 1 disjoint

cycles can be selected to be added to Cmax.                   

    In our construction we ensure that Trudy can win only if she gets k disjoint cycles from a
wire, and thus under optimal play she cannot flip a signal propagating from a variable from
false to true. Flipping a signal from true to false is not beneficial for Trudy, as her goal
is to satisfy all the clauses. Nevertheless, flipping a signal from true to false leads to the
same number of boxes for her (at least locally within a wire), and is thus allowed.

3.2 Crossover gadget

Since the graph representing Gpos(POS CNF) is not necessarily planar, wires may need to
cross each other in our construction. We describe a crossover gadget that allows two signals
to cross while preserving the signal values. The gadget has two inputs and two outputs
on the opposite sides of the gadget. Let C1,i and C2,i be the input cycles of the gadget,
and C1,o and C2,o be the output cycles (see Figure 6). An input cycle C,i is in Cmax if the
corresponding input signal is true, and otherwise it is false. An output cycle C,o is not in
Cmax if the output signal is true, and otherwise it is false.

    There are four pairwise overlapping cycles Ca, Cb, Cc, and Cd in the middle of the gadget,
forming a cross shape. Only one of these cycles can be added to Cmax. A choice of which of
these cycles is added to Cmax is in one-to-one correspondence to the input signal values (see
Figure 7).

 Lemma 3. Under optimal play, if a signal in a crossover gadget changes from false
to true, then Trudy can select at most 4 disjoint cycles from the gadget to add to Cmax.
Otherwise, under optimal play, Trudy can select 5 disjoint cycles from the gadget.
8  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

       Figure 6 The crossover gadget. Connections      Figure 7 A possible choice of a set of disjoint
   to the adjacent wires are shown in green.       cycles. The selection has fourth degree rotational
                                                   symmetry.

   Proof. If the output signals in the crossover gadget match the input signals, then only one of

   each pair {C1,i, C1,o} and {C2,i, C2,o} are in Cmax. Since the four center cycles Ca, Cb, Cc,
   and Cd all share a single square, only one of these four cycles can be chosen. Then Trudy
   can select a corresponding cycle from the middle of the gadget, and two more cycles from

   each signal. For example, a selection of five disjoint cycles for the case when the first input

   signal is false and the second is true is shown in Figure 7. If an input signal is true, and

   the corresponding output signal is false, then both C,i and C,o are in Cmax. Then Trudy

   can, for example, make exactly the same choice as in the case where the output signal would

   have been true.

   Assume now, w.l.o.g., that the signal corresponding to C1,i and C1,o changes from false

   to true in the gadget. That is, neither C1,i nor C1,o are in Cmax. Let C and C be the

   cycles in the gadget adjacent to C1,i and C1,o respectively. Thus, among cycles C, C, Ca,

   Cb, Cc, and Cd at most two cycles can be in Cmax, and therefore at most four cycles can be

   chosen to be in Cmax.                           

   3.3 Or gadget

   The or gadget consists of three pairwise overlapping cycles (see Figure 8 (left)). Two of the
   cycles partially overlap with an end cycle of an input wire, and one cycle partially overlaps
   with the output cycle. Let C1,w and C2,w be the last cycles of the two input wire gadgets,
   and let C1,i and C2,i be the cycles of an or gadget adjacent to these two wires respectively.
   Let Co be the third cycle of the or gadget, which is adjacent to an output wire. Cycles C1,w

       Figure 8 The or gadget (left) and the three possible combinations of the input values. From
   left to right: two true inputs, one true and one false input, and two false inputs. The boxes
   highlighted in grey belong to a cycle in an adjacent wire gadget.
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                               9

and C2,w are not in Cmax if the input from their corresponding wire is true, and are in Cmax
if their input is false. If Co is not in Cmax then the output of the or gadget is true, and if
it is in Cmax then the output value is false. Only one of the three cycles in the or gadget
can be selected to be added to Cmax, and thus the output of the gadget can be true only if
one of C1,w or C2,w is in Cmax.

 Lemma 4. Under optimal play, if both input signals in an or gadget are false but the output
signal is true, then Trudy cannot add a single cycle from the gadget to Cmax. Otherwise,
under optimal play, Trudy can select 1 cycle from the gadget to add to Cmax.

Proof. First consider the case when one of the input signals in the or gadget is true. W.l.o.g.,

let the signal from the first wire be true, that is C1,w is not in Cmax. Then Trudy can

select C1,i to add to Cmax and thus the output from the or gadget would correspond to true.

Trudy may as well choose Co to add to Cmax and make the output of the gadget to be false.

In either case, one cycle from the gadget is in Cmax.

If both input signals are false, then both cycles C1,w and C2,w are in Cmax. Thus none

of C1,i and C2,i can be in Cmax. If at the same time the output of the or gadget is true,

then Co is not in Cmax, and thus Trudy cannot select a single cycle to add to Cmax from this

or gadget.                                                            

3.4 Variable gadget

The variable gadget is responsible for the assignment of true and false values to the
variables of the Gpos(POS CNF) instance. It consists of two components: the value-setting
component (see Figure 9) designed to set the value of the variable, and the fan-out component
designed to duplicate the variable signal. The whole construction is presented in Figure 10.
Let C1, C2, and C3 be the three cycles in the value-setting component. The variable gadget
is the only gadget that contains non-loony moves; there are two non-loony moves (shown in
yellow in the figure) at the intersection of C1 and C2.

    As we show later, optimal play by both Trudy and Fred is to set all the variables in the
first n moves, such that Fred always sets a variable to false and Trudy--to true. Figure 11
shows the two possible value assignments of the variable gadgets. To set a variable to false,
Fred plays one of the non-loony moves in the corresponding variable gadget. Then Trudy
responds by claiming the one box available (see Figure 11 (left)). This results in the cycles

         C1
C2

             C3
                                                                  C4

    Figure 9 The value-setting component of       Figure 10 The complete variable gadget consist-
the variable gadget. There are two non-loony  ing of the value-setting component and the fan-out
moves (yellow) available, of which only one   component. Outgoing wires are shown in green.
can be played as a non-loony move.
10  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

    Figure 11 The variable is set to false (left) and true (right).

    C1 and C2 getting merged. To set a variable to true, Trudy opens a side chain of C2 (see
    Figure 11 (right)). Then Fred responds by claiming every box in the opened chain, and
    proceeds to setting the next variable. Note that after Trudy's move the non-loony moves in
    the gadget become loony moves (as they are now a part of a long chain).

        At this point we make two observations which will be useful when proving correctness of
    the construction and the properties of the optimal play in Section 4. First, observe that the
    non-loony moves come in pairs, one in each variable, such that, for each pair, either both
    moves in the pair are still non-loony or neither is anymore. We refer to them as non-loony
    pairs. Second, note that in the process of assigning values to the variable gadgets, Trudy gets
    a box for each variable set to false by Fred, and zero boxes for each variable set to true by
    herself.

        Once the value of a variable is set, it propagates to the outgoing wires through the fan-out
    component of the variable gadget. The fan-out component simply consists of one cycle C4
    overlapping with the cycle C3 (see Figure 10), to which multiple wires can be attached. After
    the variable is set, Trudy can add at most two cycles from it to Cmax. Then, if the variable is
    set to false, cycle C4 has to be one of the two selected cycles, and thus the signal propagated
    into the wires is false. If the variable is set to true, Trudy can add C1 and C3 to Cmax,
    and thus propagate the true value into the wires.

     Lemma 5. Under optimal play, after a variable gadget is assigned a value, if it is set to
    false but the output signal is true, then Trudy can add at most 1 cycle from the gadget to
    Cmax. Otherwise, under optimal play, Trudy can add 2 cycles from the gadget to Cmax.

    Proof. As we show in Lemma 7, optimal play of both Trudy and Fred results in them setting
    all the variables according to the rules described above in the first n moves. Afterwards the
    game enters a loony endgame with Fred in control.

        If a variable gadget is set to true, then there are three cycles left in the gadget: two
    overlapping cycles C3 and C4, and the cycle C1 connected to C3 by a chain. Then Trudy
    can select C1 and one of C3 or C4 to add to Cmax.

    If the variable gadget is set to false, then there are still three cycles left in the gadget,

    but now these cycles are forming a chain where each consecutive pair of cycles is overlapping.

    Now, if the output value is true then C4 cannot be in Cmax, and from the remaining two

    cycles, only one can be selected to be added to Cmax.            
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                                     11

    Figure 12 The clause gadget (left) yields four boxes to Trudy if the input signal is true (middle),
and only two boxes when the input is false (right). Boxes highlighted in grey belong to the last
cycle in the adjacent wire.

3.5 Clause gadget

Finally, we describe a clause gadget that yields more boxes to Trudy if the signal entering the
clause corresponds to true. A clause gadget is simply an extra cycle extending the end of a
wire gadget to an odd length. Figure 12 shows the gadget, and the two possible assignments
of this gadget. Whenever the signal is true, it is possible for Trudy to create a disjoint
cycle in the gadget which gives her four boxes. If the signal is false, Trudy can only make a
chain in this gadget which yields only two boxes.

 Lemma 6. Under optimal play, the clause gadget yields at most 4 boxes to Trudy if the
input signal is true, and at most 2 boxes if the input signal is false.

Proof. If the input signal to the clause gadget is true, the adjacent cycle to the clause

gadget is not in Cmax. Therefore, a the cycle of the gadget can be added to Cmax. When in
the loony endgame, this cycle yields four boxes to Trudy after Fred makes a double-dealing

move.

    Otherwise, if the input signal is false, the adjacent cycle is in Cmax, and from the clause
gadget only a chain is left. This chain yields only two boxes to Trudy after Fred makes a

double-dealing move.                                  

 4 Players' strategies and PSPACE-completeness

With the gadgets described above, we construct a Dots & Boxes instance for any Gpos(POS
CNF) instance such that Trudy can win the Dots & Boxes instance if and only if she can
win the corresponding Gpos(POS CNF) instance. We lay out the variable gadgets, attach a
corresponding number of wire gadgets, pass the wires through or gadgets, using crossover
gadgets to cross signals, and finally connect wires to the clause gadgets. An example of our
construction is given in Figure 13 in the appendix.

    The initial score we set to the Dots & Boxes instance depends on the number of gadgets
of each type in the construction. By Lemma 1 the total score in the loony endgame depends
on the number of disjoint cycles c, the number of boxes k with degree higher than 2, and
their total degree T . The configuration of the loony endgame, and thus the values k and T , is
changed only when the variable gadgets are being assigned their values. We will argue below,
that under optimal play, exactly half of the variables are set to true and half are set to false.
Thus the total values of k and T are the same, no matter which variables are assigned to
which values. If Trudy can satisfy F, by Lemma 1, she can claim 4c + T - 2k - 4 boxes in the
loony endgame, and n/2 boxes from the variables set to false. Let N be the total number of
unclaimed boxes in our Dots & Boxes instance. Then, Fred gets N - n/2 - (4c + T - 2k - 4)
12  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

    boxes. We set the initial scores of Trudy and Fred such that Trudy's final score is one larger
    than Fred's if she can satisfy F. Otherwise, her score will be strictly less than Fred's.

        Next, we describe the optimal strategies for Trudy and Fred, both before the loony
    endgame is entered and in the loony endgame.

    Optimal strategies for Trudy and Fred in the loony endgame We start by summarizing
    both strategies in the loony endgame, assuming that all variables have already been assigned
    a value using the moves we have described in Section 3.4. As we argue below, Fred can
    always ensure that he is in control of the loony endgame. It is always beneficial for Fred to
    stay in control, as all the chains and cycles in the loony endgame configuration yield at least
    as many boxes to him than to Trudy.

        In the loony endgame, Trudy can choose which chains and cycles to open. To maximize
    her score, Trudy is going to select a maximum number of disjoint cycles Cmax in the loony
    endgame (see Lemma 1). This can be done by first making a loony move in all chains, to
    which Fred responds by claiming all but two boxes, finishing with a double-dealing move in
    order to stay in control. Afterwards, Trudy makes loony moves in the remaining cycles, to
    which Fred responds again by claiming all but four boxes, finishing with a double-dealing
    moves each time, except for in the final cycle.

    Optimal strategy for Trudy before the loony endgame Trudy's strategy before the loony
    endgame is to set enough variable gadgets to true in order to satisfy all the clauses. By
    Lemmas 1 and 6, Trudy gains more boxes from each satisfied clause. Therefore, the optimal
    strategy for Trudy is to claim the boxes opened by Fred when setting variables to false, and
    to set variables to true, by using a loony move in a side chain of cycle C2 of the variables.

        As we show in Lemma 7, if Fred deviates from setting variables to false, and plays
    a loony move when there are non-loony moves available, Trudy can adopt Fred's strategy
    and dominate the rest of the game by ensuring that she ends up in control when the loony
    endgame is entered.

    Optimal strategy for Fred before the loony endgame Fred's strategy is to ensure that he
    is in control when the loony endgame starts, and it can be described completely as responses
    to what Trudy does. By our assumption the number of variables in F is even, thus initially
    the number of non-loony move pairs is even. Fred's strategy is then to keep the number of
    non-loony move pairs even at the start of every Trudy's turn. Then, once the number of
    non-loony moves reaches zero (and the loony endgame is reached), it is Trudy's turn, and
    Fred is in control. Specifically, Fred responds to Trudy's moves in the following way:

        If Trudy follows optimal play and makes a loony move in a variable to set it to true,
        then Fred simply claims all boxes in the chain opened by Trudy (without making a
        double-dealing move), and makes a non-loony move in another variable to set it to false.
        If Trudy deviates from her strategy by making a non-loony move, setting a variable to
        false, there must be at least one other non-loony move pair available to Fred. Therefore,
        Fred claims the boxes opened by Trudy, and makes a non-loony move, thereby setting
        another variable to false. The number of non-loony pairs is again even at the start of
        Trudy's next turn.
        If Trudy deviates from her strategy by opening a chain with a loony move that does
        not remove a non-loony pair, Fred responds with claiming all but two (or four in case
        of a cycle) boxes and ends with a double-dealing move. The number of non-loony pairs
        remains even before Trudy's next turn.
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                             13

Using this strategy, Fred can set a variable to false each time Trudy sets a variable to any
value, as well as gain control in the loony endgame.

    Note that the order of moves in these strategies is not enforced. Trudy can play loony
moves she would play in the loony endgame even if there are still non-loony moves available,
as long as these moves do not interfere with the values set (or to be set) in the corresponding
variables. For Fred it is optimal to simply respond to these moves as if the game was already
in the loony endgame, since otherwise he would be in danger of losing control. Indeed, if
Fred does not make a double-dealing move, the number of non-loony moves will no longer
be even at the start of Trudy's turn, and Fred loses control of the loony endgame. Thus, it
is not more beneficial for any player to make a move in any other gadget than the variable
gadgets while there are still variables that have not been set.

 Lemma 7. Deviating from the strategies described above is sub-optimal for Fred and cannot
be more beneficial for Trudy.

Proof. Trivially, Trudy and Fred always claim open boxes before making their move, except

when Fred makes double-dealing moves. Otherwise the opponent can claim these boxes in

their next move.

First, consider the strategies in the loony endgame. If Trudy deviates from her strategy

and does not select the maximum number of disjoint cycles, by Lemma 1 her score will be too

low and she loses the game. Therefore, the loony endgame strategy for Trudy as described

above is optimal.

If, at any point in the loony endgame, except for his last move, Fred does not make

a double-dealing move, he loses control. Since being in control is always beneficial in our

construction, this play is sub-optimal.

The strategies described for before the loony endgame are also optimal. Observe that,

under the described strategies, the value-setting component of a variable yields the same

number of boxes to Trudy independent whether it is set to true or to false. Indeed, if it is

set to true, the component contains three boxes with degree 3, while setting the variable to

true does not give any boxes to Trudy; if the variable is set to false, the component contains

two boxes with degree 3, but setting the value gives Trudy one box. Thus, the value-setting

component contributes the same number of points to Trudy's final score independent of the

value.

If Trudy deviates from her strategy by making a non-loony move and setting a variable

to false, she loses one box to Fred. Furthermore, setting a variable to false can never help

Trudy to satisfy formula F. Thus, such a move is sub-optimal.

If Trudy deviates from her strategy by making a loony move in any other gadget than the

variable gadget, there are two options: either she makes a move that leads to the same score

as the strategy described above, or she makes a move that contradicts the setting of the

variables and reduces her total score. The former case does not have any bad repercussions

for Trudy. Fred will respond with a double-dealing move, otherwise Trudy would take control

of the endgame. Thus, we can reorder the sequence of Trudy's moves and assume that she

first sets all the variables. However, in the latter case, the move reduces the number of

possible disjoint cycles, and thus leads to Trudy's loss in the game. Therefore, deviating

from the strategy above is never more beneficial for Trudy.

If Fred deviates from his strategy before the loony endgame, then Trudy can adopt his

strategy and ensure that the number of non-loony move pairs is even at the start of each

of Fred's turn. Since, if Fred is not in control of the loony endgame, he loses the game,

deviating from his strategy is not optimal.                    
14  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

     Theorem 8. Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete.

    Proof. A game of Dots & Boxes is finished after a polynomial number of turns. Thus, all

    possible sequences of moves can be explored using polynomial sized memory. This implies

    that Dots & Boxes is in PSPACE.

    We now show that Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-hard. Given a Gpos(POS CNF) formula

    F, we construct a Dots & Boxes instance  following the description above. We argue that

    Trudy can win F if and only if Trudy can win .

        If Trudy can win F , then there must be a variable assignment following the Gpos(POS
    CNF) rules such that every clause is connected to at least one variable which has been set to

    true. Therefore, there can be at most n/2 variables that need to be set to true by Trudy.

    Hence, Trudy can set the corresponding variable gadgets in  to true, and if needed set the

    remaining variables available to her to true in any order. Thus, by Lemmas 2­6, Trudy

    can propagate the true values down to all the clauses, that is, she can select the maximum

    number of disjoint cycles from all the gadgets, including all the clause gadgets, leading to

    the winning score in .

        In order for Trudy to win , the set of disjoint cycles Cmax that she selects must contain
    a cycle from every clause gadget, and the maximum number of cycles from all the other

    gadgets. By Lemmas 2­6, this can be done only if the output signals from each gadget

    conform to their input signals, and thus there must be a set of variable gadgets set to true

    whose signal is propagated all the way down to all the clause gadgets. In  Trudy and Fred

    have to alternate choosing which variable gadgets get set to true and false, respectively.

    This assignment can be used as a winning strategy for Trudy to win Gpos(POS CNF) game
    on F.

    Thus, Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete.          

     5 Conclusion

    In this paper we proved Dots & Boxes to be PSPACE-complete, resolving a long-standing
    open problem.

        There exist a number of other intriguing open problems related to Dots & Boxes. Does
    restricting the game to a k × n grid for a small k make the game easier? How large does k
    need to be to make the problem PSPACE-hard or even just NP-hard? These are challenging
    questions, given that even for a 1×n grid Dots & Boxes is not yet fully understood [12, 19, 25].

        Another direction of further research is the computational complexity of variants of Dots
    & Boxes, in particular misčre Dots & Boxes [12], of Dots & Boxes on other grids or even
    of variants of Dots & Boxes with more than two players as it was originally described by
    Lucas [29]. One variant that our result resolves is Dots & Polygons, since the reduction from
    Dots & Boxes to Dots & Polygons that was used to prove NP-hardness [8] now directly also
    shows PSPACE-hardness.

        Our result can be interpreted as proving that Strings and coins restricted to grid graphs
    is PSPACE-complete. What is the complexity of Strings and coins on other restricted graph
    classes, for instance outerplanar graphs (which generalize 1 × n grids)?

        This may also be a good moment to revisit other games, which are known to be PSPACE-
    complete on general graphs, but for which the complexity on grid graphs is open. This, for
    instance, includes NoGo, Fjords (on hexagonal grids), Cats-and-Dogs and GraphDistance,
    which are known to be PSPACE-complete for planar graphs [9, 10].
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                                    15

      References

 1 Oswin Aichholzer, David Bremner, Erik D. Demaine, Ferran Hurtado, Evangelos Kranakis,
       Hannes Krasser, Suneeta Ramaswami, Saurabh Sethia, and Jorge Urrutia. Games on triangu-
       lations. Theoretical Computer Science, 343(1):42­71, 2005. Game Theory Meets Theoretical
       Computer Science. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2005.05.007.

 2 Michael H. Albert, Richard J. Nowakowski, and David Wolfe. Lessons in play: an introduction
       to combinatorial game theory. CRC Press, 2019.

 3 Joseph Barker and Richard Korf. Solving 4x5 dots-and-boxes. In Proc. 25th AAAI Conference
       on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1756­1757, 2011.

 4 Joseph Barker and Richard Korf. Solving dots-and-boxes. In Proc. 26th AAAI Conference on
       Artificial Intelligence, pages 414­419, 2012.

 5 Elwyn R. Berlekamp. The Dots and Boxes Game: Sophisticated Child's Play. AK Peters/CRC
       Press, 2000.

 6 Elwyn R. Berlekamp, John H. Conway, and Richard K. Guy. Chapter 16: Dots-and-boxes. In
       Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays, volume 3, pages 541­584. A K Peters/CRC Press,
       2nd edition, 2003.

 7 Elwyn R. Berlekamp and Katherine Scott. Forcing your opponent to stay in control of a loony
       Dots-and-Boxes endgame. In R. J. Nowakowski, editor, More Games of No Chance, Proc.
       MSRI Workshop on Combinatorial Games, volume 42, pages 317­330. Cambridge University
       Press, 2002.

 8 Kevin Buchin, Mart Hagedoorn, Irina Kostitsyna, Max van Mulken, Jolan Rensen, and
       Leo van Schooten. Dots & polygons (media exposition). In Proc. 36th Internat. Sympos.
       Computational Geometry (SoCG 2020), pages 79:1­79:4, 2020. arXiv:2004.01235, doi:
       10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2020.79.

 9 Kyle Burke and Robert A. Hearn. PSPACE-complete two-color planar placement games. Int.
       J. Game Theory, 48(2):393­410, 2019. doi:10.1007/s00182-018-0628-8.

10 Kyle Burke, Silvia Heubach, Melissa A. Huggan, and Svenja Huntemann. Keeping your
       distance is hard. CoRR, abs/1605.06801, 2016. arXiv:1605.06801.

11 Kevin Buzzard and Michael Ciere. Playing simple loony dots-and-boxes endgames optimally.
       INTEGERS, 14:2, 2014.

12 Sébastien Collette, Erik D. Demaine, Martin L Demaine, and Stefan Langerman. Narrow
       misere Dots-and-Boxes. Games of No Chance 4, 63:57, 2015.

13 Erik D. Demaine. Playing games with algorithms: Algorithmic combinatorial game theory. In
       International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, pages 18­33.
       Springer, 2001.

14 Erik D. Demaine, Martin L. Demaine, Ryuhei Uehara, Takeaki Uno, and Yushi Uno. UNO is
       hard, even for a single player. In Paolo Boldi and Luisa Gargano, editors, Fun with Algorithms,
       pages 133­144. Springer, 2010.

15 Erik D. Demaine and Yevhenii Diomidov. Strings-and-Coins and Nimstring are PSPACE-
       complete. arXiv e-prints, January 2021. arXiv:2101.06361.

16 Erik D. Demaine and Robert A. Hearn. Playing games with algorithms: algorithmic combinat-
       orial game theory. In Games of No Chance 3, pages 3­56. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
       arXiv:cs/0106019.

17 David Eppstein. Computational complexity of games and puzzles. Last accessed on 06/05/2021.
       URL: https://www.ics.uci.edu/~eppstein/cgt/hard.html.

18 Gary William Flake and Eric B. Baum. Rush Hour is PSPACE-complete, or "Why you should
       generously tip parking lot attendants". Theoretical Computer Science, 270(1):895­911, 2002.
       doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3975(01)00173-6.

19 K. Guy and Richard J. Nowakowski. Unsolved problems in combinatorial games. In R. J.
       Nowakowski, editor, More Games of No Chance, Proc. MSRI Workshop on Combinatorial
       Games, volume 42, page 457­473. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
16  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

    20 Robert A. Hearn. Games, puzzles, and computation. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
           Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2006.

    21 Robert A. Hearn and Erik D. Demaine. Games, puzzles, and computation. CRC Press, 2009.
    22 Takashi Horiyama, Takashi Iizuka, Masashi Kiyomi, Yoshio Okamoto, Ryuhei Uehara, Takeaki

           Uno, Yushi Uno, and Yukiko Yamauchi. Sankaku-tori: An old western-japanese game played
           on a point set. Journal of Information Processing, 25:708­715, 2017.
    23 Ming Yu Hsieh and Shi-Chun Tsai. On the fairness and complexity of generalized k-in-a-row
           games. Theoretical Computer Science, 385(1-3):88­100, 2007.
    24 Shigeki Iwata and Takumi Kasai. The Othello game on an n × n board is PSPACE-
           complete. Theoretical Computer Science, 123(2):329­340, 1994. doi:https://doi.org/10.
           1016/0304-3975(94)90131-7.
    25 Adam S. Jobson, Levi Sledd, Susan Calcote White, and D. Jacob Wildstrom. Variations on
           narrow dots-and-boxes and dots-and-triangles. Integers, 17:G2, 2017.
    26 Will Johnson. The combinatorial game theory of well-tempered scoring games. International
           Journal of Game Theory, 43(2):415­438, 2014.
    27 Anthony Knittel, Terry Bossomaier, and Allan Snyder. Concept accessibility as basis for evolu-
           tionary reinforcement learning of dots and boxes. In 2007 IEEE Symposium on Computational
           Intelligence and Games, pages 140­145. IEEE, 2007.
    28 David Lichtenstein and Michael Sipser. Go is polynomial-space hard. Journal of the ACM
           (JACM), 27(2):393­401, 1980.
    29 Édouard Lucas. Récréations mathématiques, volume 2. Gauthier-Villars et fils, 1883.
    30 Henry Meyniel and Jean-Pierre Roudneff. The vertex picking game and a variation of the
           game of dots and boxes. Discrete Math., 70:311­313, 1988.
    31 Richard J. Nowakowski. . . ., Welter's game, Sylver coinage, dots-and-boxes, . . .. In R. K. Guy,
           editor, Combinatorial Games, Proc. Symp. Appl. Math., volume 43, pages 155­182. Amer.
           Math. Soc., 1991.
    32 Thomas J. Schaefer. On the complexity of some two-person perfect-information games. Journal
           of Computer and System Sciences, 16(2):185­225, 1978.
    33 Aaron N. Siegel. Combinatorial game theory, volume 146. American Mathematical Soc., 2013.
    34 Julian West. Championship-level play of dots-and-boxes. In R. J. Nowakowski, editor, Games
           of No Chance, Proc. MSRI Workshop on Combinatorial Games, volume 29, pages 79­84.
           Cambridge University Press, 1996.
    35 Yimeng Zhuang, Shuqin Li, Tom Vincent Peters, and Chenguang Zhang. Improving monte-
           carlo tree search for dots-and-boxes with a novel board representation and artificial neural
           networks. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), pages
           314­321. IEEE, 2015.
K. Buchin, M. Hagedoorn, I. Kostitsyna, M. v. Mulken                                                 17

A Example game

w               x      y                              z

                                                         Variable

                                                         Cross-over

                                                         Or

                                                         Clause

   c1              c2     c3

    Figure 13 Example reduction from the Gpos(POS CNF) formula (w  x)  (w  y)  (x  z). The
construction can be divided into four sections: a variable, crossover, or, and clause section. Each
section contains only the corresponding gadgets and wire gadgets that connect different gadgets
together.
18  Dots & Boxes is PSPACE-complete

    B Omitted proofs

     Lemma 1. Let the configuration of a loony endgame contain k boxes with degree higher
    than 2, let T be the sum of the degrees of these boxes, and let c be the maximum number of
    disjoint cycles in the configuration. Then, the player who is not in control can claim at most
    4c + T - 2k - 4 boxes.

    Proof. Let Fred be in control of the game. To simplify the argument, w.l.o.g., we assume
    that the last move made by Trudy is made in a cycle. Let c denote the number loony moves
    made by Trudy in a disjoint cycle and let  be the number of loony moves made by Trudy in
    chains. All but the last loony move in a disjoint cycle or chain yield 4 or 2 boxes for Trudy,
    respectively. Thus, the score gained by Trudy in the loony endgame is

    4c + 2 - 4.

    Consider the dual graph G = (V, E) to the Dots & Boxes instance. In it, a node corresponds
    to a box, and an edge connects two nodes if the two corresponding adjacent boxes do not
    have a line drawn between them. Suppose G has k nodes with degree higher than 2. We
    define T to be the sum of the degrees of these nodes:

    T=                     degree(v).

        {vV |degree(v)>2}

    A loony move on a disjoint cycle does not change T , since all disjoint cycles only contain
    boxes of degree 2. A loony move on a chain, however, decreases the degree of the box at
    both ends of the chain by 1. Furthermore, whenever the degree of a box reduces from 3 to 2
    the degree of this box is no longer counted in T . Thus

    T = 2 + 2k,

    which means the score for Trudy will be

    4c + T - 2k - 4.

    Since T and k are fixed, the score is maximized when the number of loony moves in disjoint

    cycles is maximized.                     
